

# Class 2022-09-12

[TOC]

## Equivalent relation



Ex. 

$S=\Z$, the set of intergers.

* If define relation by $a\sim b$

* The "trivial" equivalence relation

* Define on $\Z$, $a\sim b$ if a-b is even. (We use 2Z for the set of even numbers)

    * We'll check if it's equivalence relation

    1. $\forall a \in \Z, a-a = 0$. 0 is even, so $a\sim a$. 
    2. a~b => a-b is even => b-a is even => b~a
    3. a~b, b~c. => a-b, b-c are even. => a-c = (a-b)+(b-c) is even => a~c

Remark: for any $n\ge 2$, we can define the equivalence relation on $\Z$ by $a\sim b$ iff n divides $a-b$. This leads to the study of integers (mod n). i.e. congruence in number theory.

* Let X= set o f all integreble functions on [0,1]. 
* Define a relation on X by:
    * $f\sim g$     if      $\displaystyle\int^1_0 |f-g|dx = 0$.
* This is an equivalence relation.
    * $\forall f \in X$,     $\displaystyle\int^1_0 |f-f|dx = 0$. So f~f.
    * f~g => $\displaystyle\int^1_0 |g-f|dx = \int^1_0 |f-g|dx = 0$ => g~f
    * $f~g,g~h$ => $\int^1_0 |f-g|dx = 0 and \int^1_0 |g-h|dx = 0$
            => by triangle inequality, (|f-h|\le |f-g|+|g-h|)
               $0\le \int^1_0 |f-h|dx \le \int^1_0 |f-g|dx + \int^1_0 |g-h|dx = 0+0 = 0$
            => $\int^1_0 |f-h|dx =0$
            => f~h


Ex.  

X is the set of all Cities in the world. Define A~B if one could walk from A to B. (Assume enough energy.)

For example, NYC~Chicago, but not NYC~Paris.

We'll see this is an equivalence relation

1. A~A. True
2. A~B => B~A. 
3. A~B, B~C => A~C.

<u>Definition.</u> Given an equivalence relation on a set $S$, for any $a \in S$, define its equivalence class to be 
$$
[a] = \{s \in S|a \sim s\}
$$

e.g.           If in $\Z$,    $a\sim b$ if $a-b$ is even, then: 

* $[0] = \{n \in \Z|0 \sim n\} = \{n \in \Z|\text{0-n is even}\} = 2\Z.$ It's the set of all even numbers
* $[1] = \{n \in \Z|1 \sim n\} = \{n \in \Z|\text{1-n is even}\}.$ It's the set of all odd numbers
* If we continue for 2,3,4,.... you'll see
* [0] = [2] = [4] = ...... = the set of even numbers
* .....

<u>Proposition.</u>  Given an equivalence relation on $S$, $a, b \in S$, then $[a] = [b]$ or $[a]\cap [b] = \O$.

Proof. 

Assume $[a] \ne [b]$.

Suppose $[a]\cap [b] \ne \O$,    $\exists s \in [a]\cap [b]$.

So $s \in [a]$ and $s \in [b]$.

$\forall x \in [a], x\sim a \sim s \sim b$.    i.e. $x\sim b$,   $x \in [b]$. 

So $[a] \sube [b]$.

Similarly, you can show $[b] \sube [a]$. 

So $[a]=[b]$. Contradiction.

We conclude $[a]\cap [b] = \O$





Definition. A partition of a set S in S = \bigcup_i\in I  S_i, where the S_i are non-empty, non-overlapping subsets of S. 

e.g. S = [1,2,3,4,5,6]. S = {1}\cup{2,3}\cup{4,5,6} is a partition.

Note given partitioin S = \bigcup... Si. \forall s \in S,   \exists i in I, s \in S_i.



<u>Theorem.</u>  S is a set

....





Definition. Given an equivalence relation R on S. Defince the quotient space S/R to be the set of distinct equivalence classes.





































​		







